hello this is leadership live I'm David
Rubenstein coming to you from my home in
Bethesda Maryland a home as I've said
before I've spent more time in the last
30 days than I have in the last 30 years
I am always been interested in
leadership and I'm particularly
interested in leadership in times of
crisis and we have a healthcare and a I
economic crisis right now and I always
want to know how are people who are
leaders getting through this leadership
crisis and so we're very fortunate to
have a number of people I'll be willing
to let me talk to them and today we're
particularly fortunate to have somebody
who's been in the middle of a food
crisis in the view of some people and
that is Dave McLennan Dave is coming to
us from Minnetonka Minnesota which is
the headquarters of Cargill Dave is the
CEO of of Cargill he's been the CEO
about seven years now been in the
company for almost 29 years a little bit
more than 29 years and he's the person
who knows the food world extremely well
so Dave welcome very much to the show
and thank you for coming on
thanks David thanks for having me it's
good to see you again now Cargill is a
company that is privately owned it's the
largest privately owned company in the
United States is that right I think
that's correct by sales yes and so your
principal business is what is food
production food distribution food
trading yeah it's all of that it's oh
it's food production I mean things
everything from beef to poultry to
chocolate but also food ingredients
things that go into prepared foods or
that occur in other foods is also add
feed for food for livestock as well we
do have a trading business both
financial and agricultural products so
that's kind of in a nutshell what
Cargill does and did you grow up saying
I want to be in the food business how
did you get into the food business you
know I my first job out of college was
in Chicago at the Chicago Board of Trade
and I got hooked on markets and just
instantaneous price discovery seeing the
traders on the floor and how how supply
and demand were you know up close I then
got my MBA in finance and when and when
I joined Cargill I started in the
intial arm of the company it was
basically distressed asset investing at
the time but then as I got older and
became you know more involved in my
career at the company I thought this is
a food company not a financial company
and so I started developing my career
more in the food side as I got more
advanced in my career and how many
employees does Cargill have now around
the world we have a hundred and sixty
thousand employees in over 70 countries
if you count the countries where we sell
but don't have a physical presence it's
probably closer to 125 countries now
this week john theisen who's the head of
Tyson Foods a competitor of yours I
assume in certain areas he said that the
food chain was maybe breaking down in
this country we're gonna have to close
facilities do you agree with that and
are you worried that the food chain is
breaking down I think I would
characterize it that the the food supply
chain is under strain but there's a lot
of supply chains that are under strain
due to what's happening and certainly
there have been food production
facilities in various parts of the
country that have had to close because
of illness or because of supply
destruction but I think basically the
ability of us to produce food is still
there there are going to be momentary
closings moment areas in the right word
but we had a facility a beef facility
that was closed for 17 days but it's now
back up and running and has been for the
last week so I think the food food
industry and the food supply chain is
resilient I think the people that work
in it every day are resilient so I think
it's under strain but I don't think it's
broken well in response to mr. Tyson I
think the President issued an executive
order today saying that under the
defense production act he is going to in
effect command that food production
companies stay in business and make
their workers go to work assuming that
they have appropriate protection he's
going to make sure they have enough
equipment another PPE to make sure that
they're operating safely are you aware
of that executive order and do you think
that's necessary to make sure that you
can produce all the food you want in
your FAC and your facilities I am aware
of it I saw it on the headline right
before we we sat down
together so I don't know the details but
it's going to call the question of
keeping the American public fed to keep
food on the shelves but also balancing
that with the health needs and the
concerns and also the emotional health
of the workers in the plants so we're
going to have to find the balance
between the two of course if you have
illnesses at a plant such that you can't
run you don't have a choice or if you
have certain vital facilities in the
plant that that are ill and can't come
to work then you can't run the plant
either but so far I think by and large
we've been able to the industry has been
able to run we've had tremendous support
from the USDA in terms of having the
inspectors on-site you can't run a plant
without USDA inspectors so I think it
remains to be seen of how we're going to
manage that dynamic between the health
and emotional safety and physical safety
of the workers in the plants and the
executive order of which we're still
studying the details well let's talk
about for people that don't really
understand exactly how meat is produced
meat is produced in large facilities
where people are working very closely
together so is the problem because
they're so close together you have to
make certain that they're not going to
get this virus and how are you now doing
that and how might you do that under new
president's executive order well I mean
we have taken a lot of different steps
in the last two months since the virus
began to expand so everybody at our
facilities is temperature checked before
they come in if they show any signs of
any symptoms of COBIT they are asked to
leave and quarantine for 14 days not
leave the facility but leave the parking
lot everybody has a facemask
we have no visitors are allowed in the
plant we have appropriate physical
spacing in in the lunch rooms we put up
plastic dividers if people can't have
appropriate physical spacing to your
point there's a lot of people these
facilities a lot of brave and courageous
people that come to work every day and
then take their obligation to putting
food on the shelves very seriously
those will assign at one of our plants
that someone had written that said thank
you to all the employees of this
facility you are feeding 22 million
people a day
so the amount of production is coming
out of one beef facility is pretty
substantial
but many steps have been taken to ensure
the safety and health of the employees
now presumably out of the 330 million
people in the United States they're
eating pretty much the same amount of
food they ate before but they're eating
it differently and in different places
so explain to people who are watching
why for example people now have to let's
say not produce as much food in certain
areas because restaurants aren't open or
or places like McDonald's don't have as
much traffic as they used to how is this
had changed the food distribution and
manufacturing business well I mean
there's been a significant shift as you
would imagine from foodservice to retail
and with restaurants quick serve and
white tablecloth and fast casual all the
different categories have been
significantly impacted by stay-at-home
orders I would say this that the orders
for foodservice in the first three weeks
let's say let's go back to March first
showed significant declines there has
been subtle increases in the last three
weeks because I think number one is
restaurants are getting used to
whether it's curbside pickup or home
delivery take out whatever forms it may
take I think number two consumers are
getting used to it and becoming more
comfortable with the idea of I can't go
to my favorite restaurant so I will
allow you know I'll have them I'll do
whether it's ubereats or one of the door
- or one of the services that can
deliver to me or sometimes the
restaurants are delivering themselves so
the shift from food service to retail
has been substantial and you could then
start to talk about okay are people
eating the same amount of calories when
their stay at home and using
shelf-stable consuming shelf-stable
foods versus going out the fact is is
you know from when your restaurants
portions are significant and so whereas
they may not be eating all of the
portions the volumes tend to be larger
in food service than they do in retail
but the nature of the way Americans
consumer their food absolutely has
changed dramatically in the last two
months I think I just read that the
average person in United States eats
roughly five meals a week outside of
their home historically and now it's
maybe just one or two
so people are eating more at home and I
guess if you're eating more at home
you're cooking more at home and is it a
different type of packaging that you
need for producing food for people that
going to eat at home as opposed to
selling it to restaurants or a places
like McDonald's it is because you're
selling more individual packaging when
you're cooking at home or smaller
packaging as opposed to a McDonald's or
a Quick Serve restaurant or you know
they may buy you know they bought
packages of eggs that they can use or
maybe they're prepared eggs and and so
for sure the volumes that you see at the
retail level are smaller or portion
sizes I should say the good news and as
I mentioned we had the beef facility
that was closed and its reopened is we
had closed a couple of our egg
facilities since we are an egg supplier
to various restaurants Quick Serve
restaurants around the country and we
have ramped up capacity in the last
couple of weeks as we've seen examples
of demand coming back as I refer to so
but the packaging to your point is you
might buy at a restaurant or McDonald's
or a quick sort of restaurant they might
buy a package of say 100 eggs that have
been shelled already to have in storage
or for that day's cooking you're not
going to see that at home cooking
obviously now obviously at some point
these animals are going to be killed the
cattle where the chickens or the pigs
but now reports are that they're being
killed earlier than normal because
there's not enough demand for there for
our meat for example pigs there's not as
much demand for pork I guess as before
so pigs or piglets are now being killed
earlier than they would have otherwise
been is that true
well it's it's it's starting to show up
it's certainly starting to occur and
it's let it's to pieces David which is
one its demand so as I mentioned it
foodservice what people can't go out to
eat or you know the demand for a
curbside or delivery or pickup it's not
the same as is lower than it is for in
restaurants so indeed demand has come
down on the food service side there is a
story in there in the local paper in
Minnesota which described a chicken
farmer that you know raised the chickens
to produce
eggs that had to euthanize over 25,000
chickens
simply because it becomes more expensive
the eggs are not being converted or sold
in the food service and and but on the
side and the level of or the component
of pork and beef I think more of that is
about plants being closed so yes it's
technically demand but it's not
necessary demand at the consumer level
it's the fact that many plants have had
to close that processed beef and pork
and so then there's a backup in the
supply chain one of the phenomenon that
I've been watching as well which is
often hard to believe is the enormous
amount of cars that are lined up for
food in the United States and food banks
or their equivalent are you surprised
that there's so much demand for food
from people who really I guess now
probably can't afford to buy it in the
normal crisis I'm not surprised I mean I
think one of the things is the crisis is
highlighting is that the people that are
most vulnerable are the people that are
the hardest hit and I think the fact is
you know food for many people is
unaffordable or very expensive and so I
think so one of the things we're doing
and many companies are doing is
supporting food shelves and food
pantries nolle with with money but also
with in-kind donations and donations of
meals but the fact is food is harder to
get access to with the closure of some
restaurants and so the lines that we're
seeing is it doesn't surprise me to be
honest with you in the food world you
are at the top I presume you're doing
reasonably well financially you don't
disclose your your earnings you haven't
disclosed them this quarter but can you
say you're doing okay or it's really
impacting you financially I'd say we're
doing okay I mean as you said we're
private so we don't we have released our
earnings we have the unusual
circumstance it's just by virtue of
timing is that our fiscal year runs June
1st to May 31st so we are basically in
the middle of our fourth fiscal quarter
so the first three quarters I mean it's
you know pre kovat and after COBIT you
know the first three quarters were all
pre kovat if you look at March 1st just
to pick a random
random date but to pick a date as to
when things started so you know in the
fourth quarter certainly a pickup and
retail has has been helpful but there's
also been demand instruction as I talked
about in food service but you know I say
we're doing okay so the if you look at
the stocks the stocks that have been
hard hit in the food area are the food
restaurants and chains like that but the
ones that are doing well the ones that
had problems before packaged goods and
packaged food products are then a
surprise to you that many of them are
now doing much better than before like
Kraft Heinz and so forth it's not I mean
is that you see the shift from eating
away and you as you mentioned an average
of five meals a week and and maybe maybe
it's down to one or zero if just because
they can't get to their favorite
restaurants but our family is cooking
you know more we're cooking it at home
more than we ever have and the fact is
companies as you mentioned Kraft Heinz
or ConAgra or Campbell's
people are buying packaged foods and
they're buying shelf-stable foods so
they're buying things that are gonna
last for a while and in some cases there
have been examples of panic buying and
hoarding where people don't know how
long this is going to last and supplies
of their paper favorite foods are going
to be available in a couple weeks or a
couple months time so I think there's
some accelerated demand but overall you
know people are buying things with
whether it's familiar brands or things
that they know are gonna be able to last
on the Shelf for awhile but it's a
replacement because they can't go out as
frequently as they could before panic
buying was a prevalent let's say a few
weeks ago it seems to have leveled off
but is there gonna be enough food for
everybody so should I go out and panic
buy some things tonight or is there
gonna be enough food in the food stores
for me to get food anytime I want you
know it's going to depend on where you
are and it's going to depend on your
proximity to where the food is produced
and also to the the demographics and the
buying profile of the local stores but I
would maintain that there is enough food
in the system you may see temporary
supply disruptions for example you
talked about pork and pork production
for reasons that I talked about and beef
production is down about 25 to 30
percent from typical levels however so
just data point of
I went in my local grocery store last
night and the meat shelves were fully
stocked pork chicken beef fish but what
was not there still toilet paper and and
and canned soups where there was nothing
and and so people I think I've been
buying up a lot of as I mentioned shelf
stable products but there's enough food
in the system and but I understand I
mean animal instincts kick in and people
get afraid and so rather than think okay
well food will be the food system will
be up and running and whether it's
through the executive order or plants
coming back online as employees get
healthy again and it's testing becomes
more prevalent the foods the food supply
chain is as resilient as I mentioned now
when the CEO of cargo goes into a food
store to people you know run over to
service you or they know who you are and
you got any discounts in the food stores
because when you show up you're the CEO
of the largest food company you know
about two years ago we make a turkey
called honeysuckle white and I went in
and I was just checking out the turkeys
and the guy came over and said I know
who you are and you know I said I was
checking out our turkeys and seeing how
their position but I went in last night
and I wore a mask so I was incognito
nobody recognized me and and I was
perfectly happy to do it that way now
talk about farmers at the beginning part
of the food chain in many ways our
farmers suffering enormous financial
losses or are they being subsidized in
effect by the US government
our farmers going to go out of business
or they're going to be bankruptcies
among farmers or not well it's said I'm
very concerned about the farm community
so they've had the support and certain
components of the AG sector have had
government support but the fact is is as
you were alluding to work your way back
on the supply chain so if you have plans
to go down because of illness or because
of demand destruction which means the
livestock starts to back up and maybe
some of the animals have to be
euthanized I think in the case of beef
you know you can change their diets you
can slow down the processing or slow
down the growth and so there probably is
less incentive euthanization of that
particular species but then they are
also eating
their feed is grown by the farmers and
the majority of products that are grown
in the u.s. of row crops go into feeding
the livestock so I am concerned about
farmers prices have been low for a long
time there is you know the good news is
there's there's plenty of supply in the
system there's plenty in storage but it
means that the prices are low and that
you know I think bankruptcies last year
in certain segments of the AG sector
were at record highs so it's something
that we're keeping a very careful and
thoughtful eye on and they're the
community that needs to be supported so
if I wanted to invest in something in
the food chain now given where we are
should I invest in farming communities
should I invest in producers of food
should I invest in wholesalers should I
invest in traders should I invest in
retail restaurants what would you
recommend I think you know I think that
I think the switch from foodservice it's
a retail there's gonna be some permanent
level of shift and you can see different
statistics and different
prognostications about how many
restaurants are going to reopen and
certainly there will be some that they
were small or they were a niche that
won't be able to reopen and therefore I
think retailers will pick up that demand
I also think I would call them healthy
ingredients or organic foods things like
probiotics prebiotics are going to
increase in popularity so we've got a
product for example that we make for
human consumption called Epicor which is
a digestive supplement which has been
shown to create greater health so I
think those kind of things that people
can supplement their diets with and
supplement their at home cooking with
especially in the light of a pandemic I
think those are gonna be those are gonna
do well in the future so it's probably
not a part big part of your business but
food trucks all over the country they
seem to sell food a lot of people and
there are small businesses if ever there
were small businesses are you worried
that they're gonna go out of business no
I mean their mobile restaurants right
and so it's a form of at home eating or
Kirk side or
or door delivery that food trucks can
can move around to locations as opposed
to bricks and mortar restaurants where
they are where they are you know their
your rents gonna be a lot lower
obviously with a food truck than it is
with a restaurant but I think that
segment of consumption and food service
probably should be pretty well in the
future now let me ask you how you're
managing this busier company now you're
mostly working out of your home but
sometimes you go to your office
is it hard to manage this way because
most your employees are probably at home
I assume so what have you learned about
how to manage your company it's a
gigantic company how hard is it to
manage in this manner I think we've all
adapted pretty well to communicating
whether it's on zoom or Skype or by
phone I think everyone has been struck
and I don't think this is unique to
Cargill but it can be done I missed the
face-to-face interaction I saw a couple
people in the office today and it was
almost startling to see some other faces
other than the ones that you know you're
sequestered with and I think you know
part of our culture has been the social
relationships that develop over in a
company over we were 155 years old so I
missed that aspect of it but you know
the building that I'm in today has
capacity for 2,500 people I don't think
we'll ever see that many people in the
building again I think some people are
gonna decide you know what I like
working at home I can be effective I can
you know get my work done my home
computer my home laptop or PC and be
perfectly effective but I think there
are some people that just will want to
continue to have the social interaction
when they feel safe but I think that's
been one of the biggest takeaways is
technology's performed very well and you
can be effective in your job in most
jobs working remotely the ones who want
to stay at home in the future may not be
ones with small kids and dogs but that's
another matter
so let me ask you if you have the
ability to bring all your employees back
I guess you will do so but I'm told that
some CEOs say and now I I don't need as
many employees as I thought I did before
and maybe I won't bring them all back is
that something you think is a prevalent
view in the CEO community that you can
downsize in the future I don't think
it's a
of you today and you know Minneapolis
st. Paul is unique and we've got roughly
20 fortune 500 sized public and private
companies headquartered in this in the
Twin Cities community so there's a lot
of conversation about you know resuming
work and physical distancing and when to
do it the state of Minnesota our stay at
home order expires on Monday the 4th and
I don't think there's any headquarters
company here in Minneapolis st. Paul
that it's going to open the doors and
say everybody come back we're all you
know thinking about how do we do this
how do we have intelligence sequencing
what steps do we need to take whether
it's temperature taking everybody
wearing masks but I have not heard
anybody in this community or really any
of the CEOs that I've been talking to
talking about we've got it got you know
get rid of people and actually I really
hope that what has happened changes the
the ethos of this country into realizing
that the impact that this has had on the
most vulnerable on the people that are
suffering the most that has made it
worse and that there's more a sense of
you know the phrase that was being used
prominently as you know in the last year
or two is responsible capitalism so from
our standpoint if we don't have I hope
that we don't have to lay anybody off
other than I've mentioned we've had to
close some plants because of demand but
that's our objective but I don't think
anybody's thinking that way at this
point in time under the trade agreement
that the Trump administration negotiated
with the Chinese the Chinese are
supposed to buy a lot of food products
from the United States you think in
light of their economies slowing down
they'll be able to do that and do you
see any evidence that they are doing it
now I don't think certainly their
economy has slowed down but as I
mentioned we're up and running
in China all of our plants are running
and so they're there and they call it
the recovery stage but I think the fact
of the matter is 1.4 billion people have
to eat
and the Chinese depend on the outside
world on trade in order to feed their
livestock or to supply their to supply
their animal protein for example and
other products to their populations so I
do
believe that they will be able to
fulfill their commitments under the
trade agreement that was cut despite an
economic slowdown and we're a better
place to turn than the United States to
get those products and but it's not it's
planning season in North America so
ultimately when harvest season comes in
late summer early fall that's when you
might expect to see both purchases of
commodities going to China where around
the world do you see and your business
weaknesses in Europe emerging markets
Asia or are they all roughly the same
now no I mean I would say Asia I would
call a car wash I know which I described
and in South Korea I mean those are you
know they've had some early rebounds
I think Southeast Asia is probably still
you know dealing with some of the issues
Indonesia Philippines Singapore's gone
back on quarantine with a with a spike
up in in illnesses Western Europe is
ahead of the curve you know in more ways
than one they got after it faster and as
well publicized you know places like
Germany and and you know Italy in Spain
are starting to come back online I think
Austria started relaxing stay at home
rules so they are ahead of where the
United States is I think South America
is a mixed bag I mean some severe
examples in South America but probably
pretty similar to the United States so
it's mixed but when you have as I
mentioned over 70 countries in the world
that Cargill does it's a diverse
portfolio that provides diversity in
terms of results and in terms of where
the outbreaks are now you're in the
distribution business when you
distribute food around the world that
you manufacture you produce are you
doing it through trains planes trucks
boats and are those systems all working
as well as they did before yeah I mean
it's all of the above is mostly rail
truck barge and ocean borne
transportation so one of the fun facts
about Cargill is at any point in time
there's about 550 ships on the ocean
with a Cargill source product on at any
point in time but those systems and if
you think about the American food system
and and as you were tracing the supply
chain back to the farmer to the
livestock producer
to plant operators to the retailers it's
also the transportation system and so
the courage of the truck drivers and the
people and the train the train operators
I mean we depend on all of that and it's
something that people I think take for
granted they don't realize how much goes
into manufacturing and distributing food
but to your point we're seeing the
capacity and when I had spoken to the
White House in the past I said can you
make sure we get the inspectors from the
plants done USDA secretary renew has
done a great job of that can you help us
make sure we have access to
transportation and logistics to get the
food to we're seated and yes it is
performing very well so how is your
relationship with the administration the
White House do they consult you do you
talk to them with for regularly or how
does that work we I have found the
administration but also members of
Congress to be very good listeners and I
have had some inbound calls where
members of Congress have called us and
said how can we help what do you need
how can we help keep the food supply
system running I've been on two calls
with with the White House and the
administration again asking for what do
you need and one was very early on in
the process so it was like second week
of March and one was more recently with
other industries not just food but also
construction and energy and some other
industries as well but I have found them
to be very solicitous of what we need
what kind of support that we need to
have to keep the you know testing to
keep employees safe and to help make
sure that the plant workers are on the
frontline every day are well protected
both physically and emotionally so I
always like to worry about something
going wrong I always look at the glass
as being a half-empty I guess so if I
wanted to worry about something in the
food world that you live in
what should I worry about I would only
say that as I said there may be some
spots shortages of certain kinds of
protein you might not be able to get you
know the exact cut of beef pork or
chicken that you want to have but
ultimately the production is continuing
and plants are coming back online to
keep the you know the food systems safe
and to keep it operating
but overall I sleep very well at night
and I think you should too David okay
what lesson have you taken away from
this experience are you going to manage
your company differently in the future
are you going to change a lot of things
that you've done or basically you say I
got a pretty good system now and I don't
need to change very much boy I think you
know if we don't change and if the world
the world's going to change right
economically and socially everything is
going to change and so we will change
along with it but I think the role of
technology and our business and
everybody's business has become more
clear and more pronounced than ever I
think the resilience of the food system
the food supply chain has really
impressed me of the people that are in
the plants the people that get the food
to where it's needed
I think the way food is consumed the way
it's delivered and the way people think
about it is going to change dramatically
and so we're gonna get in front of that
I mentioned healthy food ingredients
delivery systems that meet the new world
where people are going to stay more
isolated more socially and physically
distanced we're going to we're going to
have to change and we will change and we
are already beginning our planning for
that for you know for the future so a
lot of people are depending on your
health because you're running a big
company so tell us how are you making
certain that you don't get this virus
and that you're healthy are you mostly
walking around with masks are you mostly
at home what are you doing with your
children and and your family you know
we're like everybody else we're limiting
who we interact with if we're outside
we're always at least six feet away from
other people whether it's going for a
walk around the block as I mentioned I
was in the grocery store last night and
I wore a mask and I were actually I wore
clothes as well so we're following all
the guidelines of the state of Minnesota
of the CDC I also think it's you know
one of the things you mentioned in terms
of being in your own home I think I've
also set a record for the most
consecutive nights and in my own bed and
I think that's a good thing I mean I'm
getting better sleep I'm getting more
consistent exercise and I think it's
incumbent on anybody in a position of
leadership but anybody anywhere to eat
better and exercise better and to sleep
well and I think having these
new routines means you can develop new
routines and stay healthier for the
future hey Sonu zum fatigue
I took a zoom fatigue but I have the
free zoom where they cut you off after
40 minutes and so that's great because
when the call started getting you know
stale then I get cut off so I'm not I
haven't made up for the premium zoom
well listen this has been a very
interesting conversation Dave I want to
thank you for giving us some insights
into the food world and I feel comforted
that the food is gonna be there at the
supermarket when I go there later
tonight to buy something and presumably
over the next couple months or as well
so thank you very much for giving us the
insights and I appreciate your time as a
pleasure David thanks for choosing
Cargill to talk about and thanks for
what you're doing for the country and
what you always have done it's a real
honor to talk to you today thank you my
pleasure